From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Several terms redirect here. For other uses, see Aurora (disambiguation), Aurora Borealis (disambiguation), Aurora Australis (disambiguation), Northern Lights (disambiguation), and Southern Lights (disambiguation).
Aurora corealis shines above Bear Lake near Eielson Air Force Base, Alaska
Aurora in Iceland
Aurora over Tuntorp, Lysekil Municipality, Sweden
Aurora australis seen from the International Space Station
Images of auroras from across the world, including those with rarer red and blue lights
An aurora[a] is a natural light display in Earth's sky, predominantly observed in high-latitude regions around the Arctic and Antarctic. The plural form is pl. aurorae or auroras,[b] and they are commonly known as the northern lights (aurora borealis) or southern lights (aurora australis).[c] Auroras display dynamic patterns of radiant lights that appear as curtains, rays, spirals or dynamic flickers covering the entire sky.[3]

Auroras are the result of disturbances in the Earth's magnetosphere caused by enhanced speeds of solar wind from coronal holes and coronal mass ejections. These disturbances alter the trajectories of charged particles in the magnetospheric plasma. These particles, mainly electrons and protons, precipitate into the upper atmosphere (thermosphere/exosphere). The resulting ionization and excitation of atmospheric constituents emit light of varying color and complexity. The form of the aurora, occurring within bands around both polar regions, is also dependent on the amount of acceleration imparted to the precipitating particles.

Other planets in the Solar System, brown dwarfs, comets, and some natural satellites also host auroras.[4][5]

Etymology
The term aurora borealis has been attributed to two sources: Galileo Galilei in 1619, and Pierre Gassendi in 1621.[6][7][8] The term entered the English language in 1828.[6]

The word aurora is derived from the name of the Roman goddess of the dawn, Aurora, who travelled from east to west announcing the coming of the Sun.[6] Aurora was first used in English in the 14th century.[6] The words borealis and australis are derived from the names of the ancient gods of the north wind (Boreas) and the south wind (Auster or australis) in Greco-Roman mythology.[6]

Occurrence

Earth's night-side upper atmosphere appears from the bottom as bands of afterglow illuminating the troposphere in orange with silhouettes of clouds at the top, and the stratosphere in white and blue at the top of the middle. Next, the mesosphere (pink area) extends to the orange and faintly green line of the lowest airglow, at about one hundred kilometres at the edge of space and the lower edge of the thermosphere (invisible). Continuing with green and red bands of auroras stretching over several hundred kilometres.
Auroras are most commonly observed in the "auroral zone",[9] a band approximately 6° (~660 km) wide in latitude centered on 67° north and south.[10] The region that currently displays an aurora is called the "auroral oval". The oval is displaced by the solar wind, pushing it about 15° away from the geomagnetic pole (not the geographic pole) in the noon direction and 23° away in the midnight direction.[10] The peak equatorward extent of the oval is displaced slightly from geographic midnight. It is centered about 3–5° nightward of the magnetic pole so that auroral arcs reach furthest toward the equator when the magnetic pole in question is in between the observer and the Sun, which is called magnetic midnight.

Early evidence for a geomagnetic connection comes from the statistics of auroral observations. Elias Loomis (1860),[11] and later Hermann Fritz (1881)[12] and Sophus Tromholt (1881)[13] in more detail, established that the aurora appeared mainly in the auroral zone.

In northern latitudes, the effect is known as the aurora borealis or the northern lights. The southern counterpart, the aurora australis or the southern lights, has features almost identical to the aurora borealis and changes simultaneously with changes in the northern auroral zone.[14] The aurora australis is visible from high southern latitudes in Antarctica, the Southern Cone, South Africa, Australasia, the Falkland Islands, and under exceptional circumstances as far north as Uruguay.[15] The aurora borealis is visible from areas around the Arctic such as Alaska, Canada, Iceland, Greenland, the Faroe Islands, Scandinavia, Finland, Scotland, and Russia. A geomagnetic storm causes the auroral ovals (north and south) to expand, bringing the aurora to lower latitudes or higher in the south. On rare occasions, the aurora borealis can be seen as far south as the Mediterranean and the southern states of the US while the aurora australis can be seen as far north as New Caledonia and the Pilbara region in Western Australia. During the Carrington Event, the greatest geomagnetic storm ever observed, auroras were seen even in the tropics.

Auroras seen within the auroral oval may be directly overhead. From farther away, they illuminate the poleward horizon as a greenish glow, or sometimes a faint red, as if the Sun were rising from an unusual direction. Auroras also occur poleward of the auroral zone as either diffuse patches or arcs,[16] which can be subvisual.

Videos of the aurora australis taken by the crew of Expedition 28 on board the International Space Station
Duration: 34 seconds.0:34
This sequence of shots was taken on 17 September 2011 from 17:22:27 to 17:45:12 GMT, on an ascending pass from south of Madagascar to just north of Australia over the Indian Ocean.
Duration: 19 seconds.0:19
This sequence of shots was taken on 7 September 2011 from 17:38:03 to 17:49:15 GMT, from the French Southern and Antarctic Lands in the South Indian Ocean to southern Australia.
Duration: 27 seconds.0:27
This sequence of shots was taken on 11 September 2011 from 13:45:06 to 14:01:51 GMT, from a descending pass near eastern Australia, rounding about to an ascending pass to the east of New Zealand.
NOAA maps of North America and Eurasia
Kp map of North America
North America
Kp map of Eurasia
Eurasia
These maps show the local midnight equatorward boundary of the aurora at different levels of geomagnetic activity as of 28 October 2011 – these maps change as the location of the geomagnetic poles change. A K-index of Kp= 3 corresponds to relatively low levels of geomagnetic activity, while Kp= 9 represents high levels.
Auroras are occasionally seen in latitudes below the auroral zone when a geomagnetic storm temporarily enlarges the auroral oval. Large geomagnetic storms are most common during the peak of the 11-year sunspot cycle or during the three years after the peak.[17][18] An electron spirals (gyrates) about a field line at an angle that is determined by its velocity vectors, parallel and perpendicular, respectively, to the local geomagnetic field vector B. This angle is known as the "pitch angle" of the particle. The distance, or radius, of the electron from the field line at any time is known as its Larmor radius. The pitch angle increases as the electron travels to a region of greater field strength nearer to the atmosphere. Thus, it is possible for some particles to return, or mirror, if the angle becomes 90° before entering the atmosphere to collide with the denser molecules there. Other particles that do not mirror enter the atmosphere and contribute to the auroral display over a range of altitudes. Other types of auroras have been observed from space; for example, "poleward arcs" stretching sunward across the polar cap, the related "theta aurora",[19] and "dayside arcs" near noon. These are relatively infrequent and poorly understood. Other interesting effects occur such as pulsating aurora, "black aurora" and their rarer companion "anti-black aurora" and subvisual red arcs. In addition to all these, a weak glow (often deep red) is observed around the two polar cusps, the field lines separating the ones that close through Earth from those that are swept into the tail and close remotely.

Altitude
Duration: 11 seconds.0:11
Video of the complete aurora australis by IMAGE, superimposed over a digital image of Earth
Starting in 1911, Carl Størmer and his colleagues used cameras to triangulate more than 12,000 auroras. They found no auroras below 70 km (43 mi) and only 6.5% above 150 km (93 mi), with a maximum in the height distribution around 100 km (62 mi).[20][21]: 322 

Forms
According to Clark (2007), there are five main forms that can be seen from the ground, from least to most visible:[22]


Different forms

Divergence point of a coronal aurora
A mild glow, near the horizon. These can be close to the limit of visibility,[23] but can be distinguished from moonlit clouds because stars can be seen undiminished through the glow.
Patches or surfaces that look like clouds.
Arcs curve across the sky.
Rays are light and dark stripes across arcs, reaching upwards by various amounts.
Coronas cover much of the sky and diverge from one point on it.
Brekke (1994) also described some auroras as "curtains".[24] The similarity to curtains is often enhanced by folds within the arcs. Arcs can fragment or break up into separate, at times rapidly changing, often rayed features that may fill the whole sky. These are also known as discrete auroras, which are at times bright enough to read a newspaper at night.[25]

These forms are consistent with auroras being shaped by Earth's magnetic field. The appearances of arcs, rays, curtains, and coronas are determined by the shapes of the luminous parts of the atmosphere and a viewer's position.[26]

Colours and wavelengths of auroral light
Red: At its highest altitudes, excited atomic oxygen emits at 630 nm (red); low concentration of atoms and lower sensitivity of eyes at this wavelength make this colour visible only under more intense solar activity. The low number of oxygen atoms and their gradually diminishing concentration is responsible for the faint appearance of the top parts of the "curtains". Scarlet, crimson, and carmine are the most often seen hues of red for the auroras.[27]
Green: At lower altitudes, the more frequent collisions suppress the 630 nm (red) mode: rather the 557.7 nm emission (green) dominates. A fairly high concentration of atomic oxygen and higher eye sensitivity in green make green auroras the most common. The excited molecular nitrogen (atomic nitrogen being rare due to the high stability of the N2 molecule) plays a role here, as it can transfer energy by collision with an oxygen atom, which then radiates it away at the green wavelength. (Red and green can also mix together to produce pink or yellow hues.) The rapid decrease in concentration of atomic oxygen below about 100 km is responsible for the abrupt-looking end of the lower edges of the curtains. Both the 557.7 and 630.0 nm wavelengths correspond to forbidden transitions of atomic oxygen, a slow mechanism responsible for the graduality (0.7 s and 107 s respectively) of flaring and fading.[28]

2024 appearance seen in England radiating blue through red aurora
Blue: At yet lower altitudes, atomic oxygen is uncommon, and molecular nitrogen and ionized molecular nitrogen take over in producing visible light emission, radiating at a large number of wavelengths in both red and blue parts of the spectrum, with 428 nm (blue) being dominant. Blue and purple emissions, typically at the lower edges of the "curtains", show up at the highest levels of solar activity.[29] The molecular nitrogen transitions are much faster than the atomic oxygen ones.
Ultraviolet: Ultraviolet radiation from auroras (within the optical window but not visible to the human eye) has been observed with the requisite equipment. Ultraviolet auroras have also been seen on Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.[30]
Infrared: Infrared radiation, in wavelengths that are within the optical window, is also part of many auroras.[30][31]
Yellow and pink are a mix of red and green or blue. Yellow and pink auroras are relatively rare and are associated with high solar activity.[32] Other shades of red, as well as orange and gold, also may be seen on rare occasions. As red, green, and blue are linearly independent colours, additive synthesis could, in theory, produce most human-perceived colours, but the ones mentioned in this article comprise a virtually exhaustive list.
Changes with time

Construction of a keogram from one night's recording by an all-sky camera, 6/7 September 2021. Keograms are commonly used to visualize changes in auroras over time.
Auroras change with time. Over the night they begin with glows and progress toward coronas, although they may not reach them. They tend to fade in the opposite order.[24] Until about 1963, it was thought that these changes were due to the rotation of the Earth under a pattern fixed with respect to the Sun. Later, it was found by comparing all-sky films of auroras from different places (collected during the International Geophysical Year) that they often undergo global changes in a process called auroral substorm. They change in a few minutes from quiet arcs all along the auroral oval to active displays along the dark side and after 1–3 hours they gradually change back.[33] Changes in auroras over time are commonly visualized using keograms.[34]

At shorter time scales, auroras can change their appearances and intensity, sometimes so slowly as to be difficult to notice, and at other times rapidly down to the sub-second scale.[25] The phenomenon of pulsating auroras is an example of intensity variations over short timescales, typically with periods of 2–20 seconds. This type of aurora is generally accompanied by decreasing peak emission heights of about 8 km for blue and green emissions and above-average solar wind speeds (c. 500 km/s).[35]

Other auroral radiation
In addition, the aurora and associated currents produce a strong radio emission around 150 kHz known as auroral kilometric radiation (AKR), discovered in 1972.[36] Ionospheric absorption makes AKR only observable from space. X-ray emissions, originating from the particles associated with auroras, have also been detected.[37]

Noise
Aurora noise, similar to a crackling noise, begins about 70 m (230 ft) above Earth's surface and is caused by charged particles in an inversion layer of the atmosphere formed during a cold night. The charged particles discharge when particles from the Sun hit the inversion layer, creating the noise.[38][39]

Abnormal types
STEVE
In 2016, more than fifty citizen science observations described what was to them an unknown type of aurora which they named "STEVE", for "Strong Thermal Emission Velocity Enhancement". STEVE is not an aurora but is caused by a 25 km (16 mi) wide ribbon of hot plasma at an altitude of 450 km (280 mi), with a temperature of 3,000 °C (3,270 K; 5,430 °F) and flowing at a speed of 6 km/s (3.7 mi/s) (compared to 10 m/s (33 ft/s) outside the ribbon).[40]